Oh, look. Are we doing Mandarin and pork health standards, are we?
Especially if viewed as a single-
No, but we might talk about pork.
Oh, yeah. The safety- Save your monk models.
Looks pretty ready.
Two rachis.
Looks pretty ready. Oh, yeah. We'll need food safety to check that one
out.
Yeah.
Why is everybody mad?
Yeah, we've got-
Luckily I'm not a doctor.
He doesn't even do it because an ice cream is-
I am.
You're tired, right? My wife's an amazing cook. I've got a baker.
Pretty good, isn't it?
So the bins are always full of kids and hot food.
Right. Welcome. Good afternoon, Minister. Thank you very much for being here today.
Sure.
That we'll get you to do some opening remarks, but I was just going to give you a
heads up if we could focus on, just by virtue of the panel, we've
got animal welfare. Oh, not in relation to your opening
remarks, but in terms of questioning, it will be about animal welfare first, and
then food safety, and then we're open slather.
Okay. So
you're out. You're out.
You're out.
Oh. Oh, no, I didn't mean to do that.
Yeah.
Okay. Oh, look, thank you very much.
I'll just-
Two rachis
... quickly cover over-
Put the two rachis
So you've got Ray and everyone else from MPI by the looks of it.
Look, for me, going,
focus this year, I'll just start with biosecurity.
Obviously, we've got the funding for Wilding Pines, which I'm quite excited by
to make sure that gets into work and
getting on top of the deferred maintenance and making some
headway into some of those seed source areas.
Obviously,
the other big thing for the last year has been the yellow-legged hornet
response, and obviously this year we'll be-
Yeah
... doing initial monitoring. The fact that we
haven't found a single hornet since 2nd of April, I
believe, and of all the last nests we
uncovered, not a single one of them showed signs
of gines or the structures that would be
in place for the next generation of
hornets. So that gives a strong signal that, fingers
crossed, wood touched, that we got them
before they got into that reproduction stage and they would be
overwintering. But obviously we can't assume that's the case, and so there'll be
monitoring going forward.
One of the other two other items I'll touch on in biosecurity, ongoing work
around foot and mouth.
We've had one readiness response and
exercise in Taranaki that went quite well, and there will be
another one coming up shortly,
along with a number of other pieces
of work in the readiness space and making sure that
we have solid plans going forward to be able to respond
effectively and
efficiently if it were to ever arrive here.
I'm quite amazed some of this hadn't been done previously,
but it's been done now, so that's good.
And finally,
on biosecurity, the other thing I'm
probably going to be taking a good hard look at over the next few months
is in terms of TB control. There,
we've announced the...
Have we announced? Maybe we have a whole TB plan.
I don't think so.
You just did.
I just did?
Yeah. Go.
Oh, we have. We have. Okay. So there is the new plan that's out there. Good.
I was getting a bit worried there.
So that's the new operational plan.
But also importantly, I've met a number of times with farmers in
Central North Island, really frustrated by
the continuing harm that ongoing infection
from the wildlife is causing on their farm.
So it's going to be really important
that we keep a good hard look and make sure that Ospri are
doing those control activities at the time they need to do, and they're
getting the access they need to.
With regard to food safety, probably the
main item between now and the election will
obviously be the ACVM bill, which you'll of course have an
instrumental role in bringing forward,
and I think that's one of the key things we definitely need to
deliver is improvements on that system so that we can get these
newer and better chemicals and drugs into the country more
effectively and cheaply.
We don't need to be reinventing the wheel here in New Zealand when
we've got trusted
agencies offshore who are doing some of the similar work.
Our focus really just needs to be on what is that unique
New Zealand perspective that any of these, either be it
chemicals or veterinary medicines, might contain in making
sure that
we're managing risks in that space.
With animal welfare,
I think
NAWAC's making some good progress in terms of getting codes
through. So we've had the deer code signed off.
They're at the moment just
doing final reviews of the pig code.
And hopefully we can put that one to bed.
And also be going out for
consultation shortly around some provisions
for chickens to do with avian influenza
preparedness.
The dairy code is
waiting for sign-off. Sheep and beef code isn't too far
away, and the rodeo code will shortly be going out for
draft consultation. So,
some good progress in terms of getting through these codes.
They had been slow going for a while there, but making some good
progress now. With that, I'll open up for questions.
Right. Fantastic. Go, Rachel.
Thank you. Thank you, Chair. Thank you.
So animal welfare?
Yes, animal welfare.
That's right.
And so,
I'm keen to just talk a little bit about dog welfare.
Yep.
First of all, though, I just want to say well done on
deciding not to proceed with the reinstatement of live cattle export
by sea. So it was good to see that the government made that decision.
So I just wanted to acknowledge that.
But on dogs-
Excuse me.
Yeah.
Can I just interrupt for one second?
I'm very sorry. Is everyone happy if the,
ACT guy takes photographs?
Yes.
Right. Thank you. There we go. Good to go. Yeah, okay. Sorry to interrupt.
We won't Photoshop him.
Yeah.
You can talk to the speaker.
So on dogs, so obviously one of the things you've previously done was-
Tethering
... yeah, it was the ending of chained-
Yeah
... dogs. So I just kind of wanted to do a little bit of a look back and a look
forward.
Yeah.
One of the things that happened then was the containment of dogs in terms of life
containment, so maybe being in a crate-
Yeah
... in a confined space, was separated out.
Do you have an intention of looking at the domestic code of welfare, so for
dogs, and then
looking to reinstate that work specifically around containment as well?
So with regard to the code, I've sent
a clear signal. I want to know where to prioritize getting through the production
codes first, and then obviously the dog code would be next.
In terms of containment, recently had a meeting with
SPCA, they've already done some work on a propo- what their
proposed sort of regulation might be in this space.
They have consulted with others,
and they've sent it through. I just actually read it this morning.
And so I'll be seeking advice from NPI on,
do they have any suggestions otherwise on
that?
So yeah, I am looking at that. It seemed very much the same way
in terms of the tethering, where you were looking at
what are the signs of prolonged tethering.
Not trying to guess how long someone had left an
animal on a chain, but more that here are the
indicators that this animal has been left in distress
for too long. But
yeah, before we move forward, obviously want to get some expert advice
on are these the right indicators, are there ones that are missing?
But that's something we can look to take forward in that regard.
Yeah. So I've just got some stuff just generally around dog welfare.
Yeah.
So, a related issue, which I guess sits in a separate
portfolio-
Yeah
... is the
reform of the Dog Control Act.
Yeah.
So my question is, how much are you integrating that work
with the Dog Control Act? Because obviously there is some
relationship there.
There's some elements to it in terms of
with the dog code,
it's quite tenuous, the links, though.
Hmm.
There are links but they're not very strong.
I think the two could stand
up separately. I don't think they need to happen precisely at the same
time. So there's stuff that I can progress now-
Yeah
... and will look to do it.
Agree with that. I guess it's just more if you're seeing overlap between things
that are in the Dog Control Act that might, and then stuff in the code and whether
you're working-
Look, I think there's elements where you look at the
challenges where you've got roaming dogs.
Yeah.
And that can-
That's my main thing
... often be from where you've got
people who are unlicensed, well, just breeding, doing
the puppy mill stuff.
So there'd be elements in the dog code
that could well encourage behaviors that
might avoid some of that. They're not
necessarily
the end all and be all.
Yeah.
If you follow me.
But you see my point, right?
Yeah.
That, yeah, if you do one thing in one part of the law, you want to try and get it
right in the other.
Yeah.
And just one final question is actually to do with puppy farms.
And so whether that's something that you're looking at
as part of the dog code reform or as part of
just wider animal welfare concerns around,
particularly
the breeding dogs who are often kept in a cage and just breed and breed
and breed, and whether you're looking at any of the welfare components around that.
Look, I think there's an element obviously of the confinement
issue that feeds into that.
They were going to send us some stuff on the puppy mills as well.
Yeah.
I haven't seen that one yet but, yeah, that was also
something RSPCA raised with us.
Sorry, just got one final quick sup, which is just about the ability for the likes
of the SPCA, but also councils and then even dog
rescue agencies to actually get in and rescue a dog because often that's the
challenge, right? Is that people know there's a dog,
or might know there's a dog in distress.
The SPCA might, but it might not meet their threshold to actually go on site.
The animal welfare officers at councils might not actually have
the right to go in and remove a dog. Is that something that you're
considering across all of this reform, the ability for people to actually get in,
remove a dog that's in clear distress, so it-
I'd have to pass this one off to Fiona in terms of I have a
feeling we didn't quite have those powers. No.
Yeah. We've done a bit of work
under the Emergency
Act.
Mm-hmm.
Even done some work around being able to have our animal welfare officers
remove dogs in that context.
Right.
But, I don't think we've got those powers under the Animal Welfare Act, and we
haven't considered them at this point.
It would require another wide piece of work, I think.
Okay.
Yeah.
Thank you. Right. We've got a couple of sups.
One from Brooke first, and then Steve.
Yeah.
I'll leave my sup and go to the primary if I can
afterwards.
Well, you're in a queue for that.
Thank you.
We can do that.
I'm also kind of interested in the dog area.
So thank you for actually making some moves on the dog tethering
area, because I know that's been particularly popular in my electorate of Tāmaki,
where we have actually had some dog tethering issues, especially-
In Glen Innes.
Yeah.
And I know it's something my community has cared about for a number
of years, and it's great to see a minister actually taking action.
In my other role as Minister of Internal Affairs, I've given out a fairly
substantial grant to the SPCA-
Mm
... in another area, which was to do with the feral dogs.
Now, that's for urban and rural.
And the aim is to get a couple of hundred dogs off the street
and get them completely desexed so that they don't end up having more and more
puppies and-
Yeah
... continuing the problem.
Yeah.
I do know that it's a little bit of a issue in some of our rural areas with those
dogs, you know, attacking farm animals.
Is that a statistic that you guys keep hold of and work with
SPCA on? Because-
Uh
... I've just kind of left it to SPCA to do the good work that they
do, but do they actually share statistics with you on that basis?
I don't know if we've got stats on that.
I dare say in rural areas, farmers will
often solve that problem themselves.
Mm-hmm.
Put it bluntly.
Yeah. Might not be a question for you, but maybe someone else in that crowd.
It's a problem.
Yeah. A lot of dog attacks.
It is a problem, yeah.
Yeah. Very much so. And I think, I've historically seen it
where we used to farm,
up against the Terera Ranges. Lots of people wanted to go in there for pig hunting.
They'd often lose their pig dogs.
Mm.
And that became a bit of a problem-
Interesting
... for, back many, many years ago, when my grandmother had sheep.
Yeah.
Okay. No, it's good. I'll query the SPCA on what sort of statistics they get.
It's most likely, it's a good question, and we'll follow that.
It's most likely with the dog control authorities and the council.
Ah.
So I suspect-
Oh
... yeah, it might more likely cross over.
It's with the dogs.
Yeah.
Okay. But no, good work on the dog tethering.
Yep.
And keep going on it.
Cheers.
Yeah.
Sorry, did you have a question?
Oh, no. It's all right, because I was going to ask about wild dogs.
Okay, so we've got a question from Rachel. Oh, no, you've had your question.
Sorry, Joseph.
Oh, thank you.
Water plans.
Yeah.
It was great-
Oh, hang on. Animal welfare, isn't it?
Animal welfare.
Yes.
And then storm. Yeah, we're still on animal-
Oh, no, sorry. I wasn't. Mine was a new one.
Yep.
Don't worry.
No, we're doing animal welfare till 1:35.
Oh, we are? Sorry. Okay, go for it.
2:35.
2:35, sorry.
That's another thing.
Shall I go, Cec?
Yes, you're next.
Thank you.
This is your favorite part of scrutiny, Minister.
Oh, you got some photos.
Oh, he's got pictures.
I got some photos.
Would have never guessed.
So,
this is this month.
No.
Yep.
And, this is just the start of the season, as you well know.
Oh, yeah.
And, we've already got in Southland
cows in mud.
This just bec- seems to be like
a,
a very familiar and normalized sight,
that we have intensive strip grazing and winter grazing,
and the cows spending a large part of the
day in mud,
and there's not appropriate places for lying.
We've often issues with water.
When there's a big deluge of rain, which hasn't yet happened,
the situation gets markedly worse.
You currently have in the estimates a budget of around
26 million, I think, for, managing and enforcement
around-
Yep
... animal welfare.
It just seems insufficient to deal with it because,
one, either, and I put this to you, you've accepted
this as a
perennial reality of the way farming is gonna be done here and nothing's gonna be
done about it.
Or two, if this isn't acceptable, there's insufficient
action being taken
to actually address it.
So in terms of the last season, there were, someone can
correct me from behind, but I think around 211-
Stephen
... or, oh, there you are.
276.
276, uh, inspections.
Now, in terms of... I mean, the point I'd make,
and yes,
you don't wanna see animals in deep mud,
but the reality is none of that is deep mud.
Every single cow you're showing there is in condition score five or
above.
Okay.
And so, if you were to say, "Okay, we're not gonna use winter crops
anymore," and for that part of the country, that
means what do they do instead?
What else? Yep.
Do they properly feed those animals?
Do they stop them for, shift them for hours and hours to
somewhere else?
The key things here are, we wanna make sure the animals are well fed, that
they've got water, that they can access those things, that they're
not, have been forced into deep mud where they
can't lie down and they're uncomfortable,
and that we don't have that sediment going into waterways.
Those are the key things that we wanna be managing.
To say we don't want
winter grazing, it is an effective tool that farmers,
particularly in the south, need for being able to feed their
animals properly over winter. And the risk of not doing it,
means that you've got underfed animals
and poorly conditioned animals, which is no good for the animal.
But isn't it a matter of stocking intensity?
And you're saying that what you see there is satisfactory
from your perspective.
But we're in June now.
Yep.
And the worst of the winter rains, or spring rains actually, are gonna
come as we get closer to the end of the year.
So a situation that already looks like that-
They're not gonna be, I mean, these animals are there for June and July.
That's when they're there for,
to that period, and then they'll be into, they'll be
getting into July, they'll be getting close to calving, so they'll be going off
into
the springer mob, which will be on pasture.
And they'll be starting to grow grass and then moving into the normal
rotation on the farm. But during those months, particularly down south,
they just do not grow feed.
So- The risk is if you force everyone to
go and put their cows only on grass all over the
farm, then we get to spring when the pregnancy happens
and the peak demand comes on them, and they've got no feed, and their
body score condition collapses, they struggle to produce,
they have all sorts of other animal welfare issues.
To me, winter grazing is a useful, and particularly down
south, a very important tool to help manage the welfare of the animals.
Now obviously, we don't want to see them being in situations
where they can't lie down, or they can't properly access water or
feed, or that there's environmental harm being caused by it.
So we're not going to see calves born into mud this season?
No.
There will probably be a calf born into mud.
I had a cow calf two days ago. That was not on the
plans. They don't fill out a memo as to when they're going to calve- ...
and which paddock they're going to calve, at what time they're going to calve, and
whether they need assistance or not.
Correct.
Sure.
Right.
That is the reality of farming.
Sure.
An animal will
arrive early. The main thing is that the farmer should know
that from this time onwards, they need to be off.
You'll always get a cow that will calve
early. And from my past experience, I've had
situations where cows are on grass, and 20 of them have all
decided in one night in a storm, "Let's go and all sit in this
corner, have all our calves together, and then run around in a circle
bellowing at the calves." And I get up in the morning and
suddenly discover, oh my God, I've got a big muddy patch with a whole bunch
of calves. Unintended consequences, it happens.
You don't want it to happen. But these things
will happen.
So you're okay with this scene?
Those cows are in great condition.
I
think you're probably looking in the foreground at the wettest part of the paddock.
It looks like further back there is a lot more drier.
And again, you can see none of them are over their hoof height
in terms of the soil.
Some here maybe.
Well, again, what does the rest of the paddock look like?
Can you share it with the rest of the committee, Steve?
Have you had a massive overnight rain?
Yeah.
People can take a picture of one small section of a paddock
and not get the full context.
Sure.
Okay.
Are you okay with that?
Can I just get another question?
No, that's not great because you're wasting feed in a
boggy patch.
Probably a better place to put the baleage in the ring feeder.
Are you okay with the animal welfare issue?
The animals-
I asked you about animal welfare
... condition score five or better.
Okay.
In terms of adequate lying off.
Steve
Well, I don't know what the rest of the paddock looks like.
There's possibly a great part of the rest of the paddock.
If you were to give-
You know the cows are stuck in a strip. They don't have access to the paddock.
Yeah, but I don't know what the rest of the strip looks like.
That looks like a hollow there, Steve.
Now, the rest of the paddock, we've gotten one small little
smidgen of what probably a 200, so we're
looking at perhaps 20 square meters of a 200 hectare farm.
Okay. Thank you very much. We're going to move on.
And so I can't make a judgment on the entire farm based on that.
I do have a supplementary.
Yeah.
It's very directly related to this.
I'm the member of Parliament for Southland.
We have an activist called Matt Coffee who often takes photographs like this, and I
don't know if that's the one, to supply to the Green Party and to put on national
news. He takes very selective photographs
that try to
spread his particular narrative.
It's not helpful and it's not reflective, and if the
minister could confirm
what breaks are in terms of feeding cows,
confirm that we have 100 days of the year roughly in Southland where
grass does not grow.
Yeah.
And also confirm that if the cows were on this
grass trying to eat from places where the grass is not growing, there would be much
more significant impact on-
Yeah
... the environment and potentially on the cows than a managed-
Is there a question?
Yes. Managed winter grazing program.
Yeah. Look, I think you could very well have even worse environmental
outcomes if you try to just go grass
only
in Southland over that time. Particularly, you could
end up damaging vast chunks of your farm,
compacting the soil, which will lead to higher nitrate leaching,
and prevent future grass growth.
There's been a great amount of work done by industry groups
along with the MPI in terms of winter grazing plans to help
people understand the best ways to do this,
to do it smartly, to maximize the welfare of the animals, and to
protect the environment. And that's why I encourage all farmers to--
And where it doesn't happen, we have prosecuted.
Where people have done it poorly,
we haven't held back from prosecuting them.
Thank you.
Thanks, Minister. Does anyone else have any questions about-
Well, if I could just-
Animal welfare
... just on the question that I asked then.
Yeah.
I appreciate I'm hearing a lot of them, but-
We'll try and stick to the budget, shall we?
Because that's what we're talking about.
We're talking about different-
Just the last one, just on break feeding.
If you could just explain what that is, just for the context of that photograph
there.
Well, it's basically you offer a fresh strip of feed
to the animals,
generally first thing in the morning,
and usually that's intended to be,
you work it out based on how much feed is there.
So that's the animal's daily ration.
You'll probably provide baleage or some other form of supplementary feed
to ensure that-
Just in the context of those photographs there?
Yeah, that is strip grazing. Yes.
Yeah.
It's strip grazing.
But they-
That's what I'm saying. They've got nowhere else to go. They're in the strip.
They did have feed.
Well, you talked about strip doing feed across. Yeah.
Hey, look, Peter, I'm going to move this on now because I think we've-
Yeah. But I've got another question on animal welfare
... drifted off topic. Does it relate to the budget?
Yes, it does.
Mr Abel. Thank you very much. Great.
So Minister, you spoke about the codes of welfare that you're
developing.
Yeah.
Is there any intention-
Well, Nayworks
... that Nayworks' developing
Is there any intention to develop a code around fish,
given we recognize them as sentient in our animal
welfare acts?
I believe that is possibly
on the thinking,
but it's currently-- obviously we've got a priority
around production animals at the moment, and then the existing companion
animals.
I know there has been some
thought given to it in NAWAC, but as yet, I
don't believe I would know. I haven't received request for
that.
And I've got a follow-up on-
A supplement. Yeah.
On the fish one?
Yes, on the fish one.
Yep.
Yep. So, specifically farmed fish as opposed to
all fish.
Yeah.
So farmed fish,
I understand Agriculture New Zealand might be working with MPI on MPI
adopting, because there's a voluntary code held by Agriculture New Zealand-
Yes
... that could be quite a straightforward solution for MPI to adopt
that for
use as a
code.
Uh-
See nods from officials
I know we're working with them on that in terms of adoption,
as you all like to remind me, in Parliament last year, there is a process that has
to go through with NAWAC.
Yeah.
I've got another code question.
Where's things at on the pig code in terms of NAWAC?
So obviously after the decisions that were taken, there were a
few matters that we wanted them to review in
terms of, okay, these decisions have been made in
that context.
Just getting some further advice on that, and a range of
stakeholders have also been
involved in that discussion.
Okay. Yep. Good.
And I believe that finished up recently.
Yeah. So the meetings have finished.
The consultation is closing, I think Friday.
Yeah.
And report back, will we see anything anytime soon or?
Maybe.
NAWAC is due to provide a response on the basis of all of that
consultation to the minister, and then the minister goes through his regular
process around issuing a code.
Yeah.
Before the end of term, or?
We'll see when we get the advice back and how much time's left and, yeah.
Okay.
Thank you.
Okay. Any more
questions on animal-
Welfare.
Animal welfare?
I'm good.
Animal health, I count.
Okay, so we can-- You wanted to move on to biosecurity?
Well, Rachel Brooking isn't
here.
But she's due out in two minutes, is she?
Yes.
We could do other stuff.
Well, does anyone else have a question on um-
I've got biosecurity. I've got questions on food safety.
Do you want to do food
safety?
Okay. Go food safety.
That was what we planned on doing next.
Yeah.
I'm trying to understand what is going on in the
imported blueberry space.
Right.
So
I've had a conversation with some,
I think it'd be fair to say, distressed local producers who are concerned
about a liberalization of the rules
around
importation of fresh blueberries.
Yep.
And there are real concerns about the multitude
of potential hitchhikers on those fruit, such as
fruit flies of various different varieties and other
species.
And one of the food safety related things, this is in the biosecurity space as
well. But the food safety related thing is,
apparently, MPI is advised that it's acceptable
that where a blueberry has
come in contact with the ground, that it can be wiped clean and
sold as fresh fruit in New Zealand, but that that is
not a practice that occurs here in local production. Can you speak to that at all?
Look, and
I'll just jump over to the biosecurity side quickly.
Sorry. That was my fault for-
Yeah
... going on.
So there is an import health standard being developed in
terms of the fruit fly stuff. The controls around it
will be identical to other imported plant or
fruits and stuff, where we
have controls around fruit fly, is what I've been told.
Obviously, I haven't seen the final standard yet.
It's all still being worked on. In terms of the...
I think our Mayor de Vince or
someone else know more about that part.
We should
find out the specific, but I-
I remember it in the discussion, but I can't remember exactly what the correct
answer was
... I think what you could feel confident in is
we are not going to allow the importation of a food product into New Zealand that's
not safe. I mean, we are probably amongst the most rigorous
set of import health standards worldwide.
Mm.
Right? So, that's not going to happen.
One of the issues here is
we export blueberries-
Mm
... and we've sought
trade relation. We've sought
through other countries the same thing, where they have wanted to hold our
blueberries out,
and we've managed to get trade and market access because the blueberry sector in
New Zealand have wanted us to get that for them, and we've got that.
In the same way that the countries that we trade with Want-
Access
... to be able to access and have their products come to New Zealand, who've been
through a very rigorous process on this.
Yeah.
It takes a long time.
Mm.
And I'd be very confident that there's no way we would allow a product into New
Zealand that was gonna make people sick or that was going to bring in a pest or
disease. It's an incredibly rigorous process, open to challenge.
I think they've challenged the process.
It's all in a formal structure-
Mm
... to resolve any of those issues.
But I think the fundamental issue is
New Zealand trade, we export 93% of our food.
Yes.
That's how we make our money.
Yeah.
We have to be open to receiving some as well.
Yeah. And I think there's always tension.
There's quite a bit of tension in the financials in that part of the sector.
Just on the food safety side of it, so we already know blueberries are a
high-risk-
That's right
... product for food safety-
Yeah
... in terms of frozen blueberries.
Yeah.
How is that exacerbated by-
Mm
... them being fresh,
in terms of the risk of,
um-
It's more the conditions in which they're picked and the health of the pickers.
That's right. Yeah.
The hepatitis A risk is from pickers-
Yes
... for countries where hepatitis A is endemic.
Yes.
It's not endemic in New Zealand. So, it doesn't really matter whether it's
fresh or frozen, it's the contact with the picker.
So that's an ongoing issue, and that
issue is not increased by the fresh nature of the product-
No
... but it is an issue that comes with imported-
Absolutely
... fruit.
Yes. It's less likely in, far less likely in New
Zealand and more likely in some countries. Yeah.
So how do we manage that problem practically then?
Yeah. The controls that we have in place are
good agricultural practice.
Yeah.
So, ensuring that New Zealand sources from locations where they've got good
hygiene practices. Some countries actually vaccinate their workers-
Right
... to ensure they lower that risk.
Mm.
But since we had that issue with frozen berries, we've introduced
new controls at the border, which requires,
let's look. Requires, um-
I really want to laugh, it's fine that way
... importers to be assured that they're dealing with-
Oh, it's not going to go
... with a producer that's got a good control, and it's basically about hygiene
with the workers really.
Yeah.
Make sure that the risk of hepatitis transmission is minimal.
Okay.
Okay, we've got a question from Dana.
Thank you. I just wonder if we could just take a step back on the food safety
thing, just briefly, so that I could understand a bit better
what the main priorities are and the outcomes that you're looking for in the next
12 to 24 months in the wider food safety portfolio,
and how that success will be measured-
Uh
... for the country.
For me personally, it's about
that import, sorry not the import health standard, the
ACVM changes.
And I think we'll be working out targets with the team
in terms of how many new chemicals, et cetera,
and the timeframe it takes to get them over the line, reducing the queue.
Mm-hmm.
Those are sort of the measures will be put in place there.
I think within our system, we've got a range
of metrics that I don't quite know off the top of my head
around Campylobacter and a whole range of other diseases
that
we want to make sure that these things
are kept at a low level.
Mm.
And I guess the other point, I've had in place
what we call the Food Act Improvement Plan, which is
around reducing some of the
perhaps
compliance barriers for some of the less
riskier operations and smaller operations-
Mm
... to enable those businesses.
We had an announcement
nearly a year ago around the
home-based cake makers.
Right.
Removing rules and regulations from them.
We've had
export extensions have passed. So when another country
says, "This is the formulation
that we want on a product," then
those exporters don't have-- And if it's different to the New Zealand
formulation, they don't have to go through this long, complicated process
to be allowed to do it to that formulation for offshore.
It's just like, if that country's happy with it, here you go.
So, just carrying on with some of that work of making sure the
system is a bit more agile.
I sort of feel like
there's a lot of rules and regulations that are in place
for if you're Fonterra-sized.
Mm.
But if you're a bit smaller, it's
quite a bit heavier or-
Mm.
And that prevents some of the smallers eventually ending up as
Fonterras, because there's a bit of a barrier to growth there.
So we're just trying to make things a bit more risk proportionate. Yeah.
Okay. Thank you.
Thank you very much. Oh, one other, I was just going to ask you about biosecurity.
There's been a bit of noise.
Oh, Rachel, yeah.
Oh, I'm sorry, you're here now. You want to talk about food safety? Yeah.
Well, I just thought you were getting ready, so I was just going to-
Oh, sorry. What are we on?
We've jumped-
Food safety.
We didn't have a structured agenda.
Yeah.
And then we set it up for you guys so that we went with
animal welfare first, and then food safety, but then-
Okay. Well, thank you for doing it in that order.
And I've just been at conservation, which is why I've run across, because I thought
you were doing food safety last.
Oh.
That's what we actually did have on our list.
Oh, you weren't here for the next meeting.
You're going to have to wait.
Just go.
No, no.
I was on the other one.
Yes.
It would be useful though for when
you have-
Mm
... many different portfolios to schedule the times.
That's the point there.
Um, job cuts. Let's talk about that.
No one else got confused.
Yeah.
I'm not-- I don't think I was confused, Suz.
Just ask the questions.
I'm rude to say that.
We didn't have a structured agenda anyway.
Let's just move on and make the most of this-
It's in an order
... time.
So you, um, and I, I'm sorry, I missed...
I don't know what's been covered already.
We talked about animal welfare.
On food safety.
Oh, no, but in terms of food safety, we talked about blueberries.
It's not helpful either, Minister. Sorry?
We talked about blueberries.
I'll take the question.
And we talked about-
Oh, hi.
We talked about blueberries
... what a overview of what's going on in the food safety space.
Um, so can-
We can't all, we can't all talk about ourselves for half an hour.
Two questions. One about blueberries, one about the border program.
Yeah.
Okay. This is scrutiny week, Mr. Mooney, and I am one of
the two opposition spokespeople for food safety.
Yeah, and you're coming in and making a scene for no reason.
And so it is important that we get to ask the questions and know what we've missed,
because the timing has been not what we thought was
happening on the agenda, with food safety being the last one.
Would you like me to ask an interim question while you-
No
... catch up with your colleague to find out where we're at?
No, thank you. I've just done that now.
Um, so the question is, and I
can hear the huffing and puffing, but my question is
about, uh, that it appears that
the minister has not ruled out cutting roles,
uh, for Food Safety Business Unit.
So I've asked, is the min-- uh, I've asked in a WPQ, is the Minister for
Primary Industries New Zealand Food Safety Business Unit exempt from the
government's public service job number cuts?
And the reply was, "At this stage, no decisions have been made about specific
roles then."
So will the minister rule out job cuts in this business unit?
No. Um, you know, the, Ray will be working
on, um, looking at what is required,
um, and what is gonna be most appropriate, and they'll
bring advice back to me. You know, a lot of food
safety, um, is cost recoverable work,
so if the level of work reduces,
then we will need less people. If the level of work
increases, then we'll need more people, and it'll be
paid via the cost recovery mechanism.
I-- What's the percentage?
73%.
So 73% of the budget for food safety is cost recovery.
Right.
So a large part of the workforce is determined by
how much actual work they have to do in that
area.
And the other 30-ish percent that's not
levy-based?
Um, well, Ray will be working through that and come back with
ideas. But, you know-
And what's the-
... times move on, and ch- things change, and priorities change, and
technology changes, and you can do things smarter and more
efficiently as you go forward. And so we'll always be looking
for what is the smartest and most effective way we can achieve the
outcomes. And it's not about whether there's a certain number of people doing it,
it's about what is the outcome we're after.
And the timeframe for that 30%?
Uh, in terms of the feedback-
The non-levy
... on what's-
Sorry.
Ray will be talking to Minister Mclay on that one.
Oh, the, yeah, that's right.
Yeah.
So, so the, the processes, um, over the next, um, few months will
be putting together our proposals.
We'll be talking to ministers about it, go on its way through Cabinet.
So there won't be any finalization of numbers and things until we, through that
process.
Yeah.
Thank you. I've got another question for this primary thing.
That's-
Right. No, you can fire away.
Oh, okay. Thank you. Um,
I'm interested in our alignment with Australia-
Yeah
... in terms of FSANZ, and it seems, um,
that there's been a change in approach from your government in
terms of, um, coming out of those,
of those, um, agreements.
And so I'm wondering if that, so the infant formula, for instance.
Yeah.
And then where, um, we've got this decision coming on the
Health Star Ratings as well.
Yeah.
So is that a general approach to move away from FSANZ?
And if so, have, have you
asked for advice, Minister, as part of this budget process on,
um, the costs which would, is associated, one, with
those decisions, those particular decisions to not be aligned with
Australia, but also, uh, is it
really, uh, uh, is where you're heading to just
totally end the relationship with Australia, and how much would that cost?
No. It's not our intention at all. Uh, the food safety, the
joint food system is extremely valuable to this country.
We, uh, I think it's 70% of the
food that's manufactured and produced here in New Zealand gets exported across the
Tasman. So having a joint system is extraordinarily
beneficial to all of those companies.
Uh, we are committed to the joint system.
I point out that the previous government opted out of the CARVER standard.
I'm currently looking at rejoining the CARVER standard.
Really?
So we opted out of one, you opted out of one.
Looks about balanced to me.
Um.
Um, and so, no, I'm not looking for, um, I've no interest
in r- uh, leaving the joint system.
But, you know, there will be situations where, as a
country,
we feel strongly about an issue, and we will say, "No.
Actually, in this situation, we will seek a modified or a
different way of doing things here in New Zealand." It is the rarity.
It is not the norm. Um, I've signed up a vast
number of, um, agreements since I've been
in the role. Um, and yeah, we've had one,
one example where we've decided not to go with the joint food system,
uh, the decision around Health Star Rating that will
be on the cards for next year.
Okay. I'm interested in
your comment about the Kava standard.
Yeah.
And that was based on cultural grounds-
Yeah
... more than
financial grounds of business interests or anything like that.
Yeah.
Why would you be wanting to undo-
Because the Pacifica community came to us and said they
actually were interested and thought it was a good standard.
That is very interesting, Minister.
I'm tricking down to it?
Yeah.
Okay. Thank you.
Some advice.
Yes.
Okay. Does anyone else have a question?
Food safety.
Rachel. Okay.
School lunches.
Yeah.
So the total appropriations for food safety have remained largely the same
compared to the previous year.
Yet this government has made a set of choices that have impacts on the food safety
operations.
We've seen under the
Official Information Act that there were 21 food safety investigations
into school lunches from 1 May 2024 to 14th of
November 2025.
So do you know the average cost of those
investigations? And has the ministry assessed whether current funding
levels are sufficient, should complaint
volumes increase further?
Well, my understanding is complaint volumes have actually decreased over the last
year.
In respect of the school lunches-
Yeah
... yes, minister.
Yeah.
Tailing off.
And
21 investigations is probably, I don't know the numbers off the top of my
head. I don't know Vince would be able to provide those either, but I doubt it's
going to break the bank.
We've responded to the school lunch investigations, the complaints
with existing resources, we've managed to do that. The team have worked hard.
It's not always been straightforward.
Mm-hmm.
But we've managed to do that with existing resources.
We've just flexed where we need to.
So no other work has been delayed or deprioritized because of-
No, no
... because of that?
No.
Okay, thank you. Okay. Different topic.
I'm interested in the use of AI in food safety.
Well, and across government.
So we've heard from the Minister of Finance generally that
AI will be used to reduce costs. So
do you as minister intend to direct officials to identify opportunities
with artificial intelligence within the food safety portfolio?
I think we've already identified areas within
ACVM approval where AI could be particularly
useful. A big challenge there is collecting large,
and this is also for biosecurity and import health standards.
You've got a large lot of research that needs to be
done around
scrolling through many, many scientific papers in
terms of trying to understand
risks and challenges and
results.
So AI is probably going to be a great tool in that regard
for helping pull all that together and be able to give
quicker insights. I know within the trial within biosecurity, and
we can talk about that later,
it's actually shown some real promise in reducing the time taken to
create import health standards, and I think the same thing could probably be
achievable within the ACVM system as well.
So sorry, so your answer there is it might help speed up some
analysis of large-
Yeah
... research trials and data sets and IC events.
Yeah.
Anything else or that's?
I'm sure the guys will probably come up with more ideas as time goes on and we
learn more about the tool.
But at the top of my head, that's where we're looking at the moment.
I don't know, Vince, you got anything to add there?
We've got a number of other areas we've begun looking at.
We've got a workforce that does what we call circuit verification.
So they go and do verification on businesses.
After a visit, at the moment it's a manual process.
They write notes. They then go back to the office and write a report.
Now, that's an area where AI could really help in terms of
collating information, producing reports more quickly,
assisting with some review of those reports.
So,
there are several areas like that that we would be very open
to exploring with AI, and we think there's real benefits
both for our staff, but also for a better outcome
for businesses.
And do you think that would reduce staffing requirements?
Or
do you see it as a
useful tool, not a thing to reduce staff numbers?
It may do.
Or both.
It may do. Look, it's possible.
But it would also have some other benefits in terms of the quality of outcomes and
the quality of reports, writing and things.
So it could have efficiencies, and that would be a perfectly
reasonable thing to be pursuing.
But
sorry, it might happen in the future, but there's no clear
plan to
swap AI out with staff at the moment.
There is no plan to swap AI with staff.
But there are areas that we are looking at, we call use cases-
Mm
... that have potential with AI. That's the right type of thing to do.
Yeah.
Perhaps different from what the Minister for Finance has suggested.
Well, I think over time as we utilize these tools more, we'll learn more about
them. At the moment, we've got a lot of backlogs
with ACVM reporting or approvals,
so utilizing the tool with the current workforce to speed that up.
When we've potentially caught up, it might be a situation then of
actually now the right size is smaller.
But this is something that needs to be year by year looking at it,
looking at what's available, looking at how the technology's going.
Also, in the food safety space, it's about what our trading
partners also accept as well. So
there might be-
Solutions that come around and some of that verification work
that,
if trading partners say this is acceptable-
Mm-hmm
... then we can move there.
But no clear plan at the moment?
Well, no, there is goals, or there is
lots of potential there, and we'll be exploring it for sure.
Within biosecurity, there is definitely a plan in terms
of
the import health standards of utilizing it there.
Early days within food safety.
Okay, thank you. Thanks.
Now we're talking about biosecurity again.
Okay.
I've got a question about our border
security, I guess.
Yep.
So there's been a bit of noise this week about people, the difference between going
to London and going to Singapore and having your photo taken, then you're straight
into the country, whereas if you come back to New Zealand, and you've got to fill
out a form, and they ask you if you've been running in the mud or something.
Well-
Which I actually think is great
Well, that's not true, though. You don't have to fill
out a form to come to New Zealand.
You do if you haven't done it online.
Yes, but that's-
Anyway, moving on. That wasn't really a criticism.
I was actually asking about- How muddy are your shoes?
You alluded to the fact that you
were going to, it was going to become-
Sorry, I'm passionate about this.
Yes. And you alluded to something earlier in our discussions about it
would be easier.
Yeah.
And so I just wondered what you were meaning by that.
Can I just deal with this? So most-
I had to fill out a form
...
I travel a lot of countries, right, with this job.
And, I have to fill out various declarations to get into
these countries. Most of them are far more difficult to do than here, I have to
say. It's a bit of a struggle. The New Ze-
Try and visit India anytime soon
The New Zealand traveler-
I think it's good
The New Zealand Traveler Declaration has been operating for three years.
It has a 75% uptake of citizens, we have not made it
compulsory. We made a decision
not to make it compulsory. We may at some point.
Mm.
We are worried about there are elderly citizens and others that may not find
it easy to use the technology, and there are
a range of situations with people.
So we have grown this from nothing to 75%, and
that's voluntary compliance. Air
New Zealand's pretty good now, and when you travel within New Zealand,
it will send you a thing, actually, as you check-in for your flight to say, "Have
you filled out your NZTD?" I'm surprised now when I hear about New
Zealanders saying
that they haven't filled it out or they don't know about it, because it's
impossible to miss it.
Most of the airlines do.
Don't worry, I heard those things too the other day, but they're not accurate, are
they? Because
once you've done it once and it's on your device,
it's there for the next time. Your passport's loaded, everything
is available. So
good is it in New Zealand, that it will also tell
you as you come in to walk in the airport which lane to go to.
Yeah.
Right? So the New Zealand system is about as
automated as any that I have seen. We don't make
you line up for a photo. So you come in through customs, you'll probably go through
the smart gate, and most likely, unless you have something to declare,
someone will check you through, and you'll walk past the dogs and you're out.
Yeah.
And that's because of that NZTD application.
Some people still fill out forms. I'm astonished when I come back on flights and I
see these forms being handed out and people-
That's me
... people don't have that, particularly Kiwis and Aussies, who should know better
by now. But Australia doesn't have the system that we have.
They're only trialing producing
electronic declarations. And you only do it through Qantas.
So New Zealand is well advanced, even in our closest trading partner.
So
what will make it even easier
is Stuart and his team are working on a
program at the moment where
once you've passed through customs, you'll
not have to go through the next step with an NPI person unless you have something
to declare, where they tick your passport off and say, "Yes, you've done your NZTD,
off you go." You'll just get your bag or whatever you've got, and just walk
straight out past the dog team. And that'll be it.
So, that will make us much more efficient.
Yeah. And I, yeah, I-
Even further than we are.
I think you've misconstrued my angle on it because my concern was that
we're not making it too easy.
Oh, it's too easy now.
Because we're so primary based. No, because the radio
noise was saying that it was too hard.
But my concern was about the fact that we've got this primary industry-based
economy, and we-
Okay
... we need to be careful that we're still maintaining those checks and balances.
And if we're doing-
No, we do. Because what we do-
Yeah
... what we do that's really important is, we have a
algorithm that picks up people that go through the fast lane, and it
may be you one day that gets picked up, and they've done nothing wrong.
We will search through all your bags.
And so we do that on a special algorithm so that we can report the
results, and we know that we're, what are we, 98.5% compliant?
Yeah. And 98.5 is the standard, and we're above that.
We're above that.
99.
Which is good. It's good. So it's true to say some
people still bring things in that they shouldn't and say that they haven't.
But the find rate
beyond the processes we put on is pretty low.
Okay.
Thank you.
And it's fair to say those dogs' noses are pretty damn good.
Yeah. Yes. Sorry, just here to say-
I was going to say something interesting.
I think having these declaration forms are good.
Oh, please.
But are you saying that they're not mandatory?
Well, no, the declaration form, declaration is mandatory.
Mm.
But we haven't made it mandatory. We haven't taken away the cards.
So if you refuse to fill it out on here,
we don't feel that you're able to, you'll have to fill out a card.
Right. I understand.
Yeah. The challenging question we're getting to is at what
point do we, but we'd want to do this with everyone's agreement, just say, "If
you don't fill that out online, you don't come up." And other countries do that.
Like single
In the US.
Yeah. Okay. Right. Jo, bring it on. Thank you.
Caulerpa.
Yep.
Minister, I want to talk about that, please.
What specific funding has been allocated in the budget for tackling
Caulerpa in the eradication or whichever it is you're going to do with
it?
Given that...
And it'd be really cool if you could talk about the new piece of kit that you've
got to help with that. But,
and I understand there's been some found in the Whangarei Harbour, which I
understand is quite a small amount, which can be taken quite
quickly.
But I'm really interested in the level of investment that's going to go into this
going forward, given that we are likely to see more and more perhaps incursions of
it as it travels potentially across through into the
east.
Yep. So I'll start with the dredge.
I just saw a photo before of it about to go in the water.
Yeah.
So that will be
hopefully start over the next week, start getting some feedback in terms
of its effectiveness. In terms of
funding for this year, we obviously, because
there was lots of delays in being able to put the dredge, we'll get it
together. And also the fact that
a lot of the Caulerpa died on us,
so we weren't really able to test it.
Some of that funding will be carried through.
Will also be last year, we worked
with the Ministry of Finance in terms of
underspend, being able to bring that through
into various biosecurity programs.
So Caulerpa will be one of those that we'll be seeking for that and
intending, I believe, John, you told me the other day, around 5
million was the intent for this year to spend on
that.
I think the main
thing, and you mentioned, sorry, Whangarei Harbour had already been killed.
Correct? Or one, two?
It's had, yeah, two very small patches.
One's been treated, the other one's about to be.
One's about to be. Yeah.
As of today, both patches.
Oh, both patches are dead now.
Excellent.
Yeah.
I've got a supplementary.
Oh, okay. Oh, thank you. Thank you for that, Minister.
Can you talk to the
potential of this
piece of machinery and what else it might be able to tackle in that
space?
I know we had a bit of a chat about it at field days.
Yeah.
But it'd be really, I think, interesting, good for the perhaps public to hear what
else the potential use of this
could be,
if you wouldn't mind elaborating on that a little bit.
Yep. So fair to say I wasn't expecting to see
Thunderbird 3 or whatever Thunderbird it looked like,
sized piece of equipment when I got sent the photos of it.
It is
truly an impressive machine that's been built.
The fact that it's
quite modular in design means that
actually there are
perhaps, and we hadn't considered this earlier, there are gonna be other
options that can be put towards. So,
there will be
lake weed that potentially it could
deal with.
There's probably a range of other,
given its modularity in terms of you've just kind of
like a underwater combine harvester.
Mm.
You can drop the header off and
put something else on and could do a range of work.
So that's something we-
Mm-hmm
... basically need to put a bit of thought towards as
to,
this would be, it's quite a valuable tool.
Just having it sitting around waiting for patches of Caulerpa wouldn't
be a great use of its time. So there's other options there that
we'll be looking into, but haven't certainly firmed anything up-
Yeah
... just yet on that. But it's certainly in the thinking as to we need
to make full use of this.
That's good. And your first- And I just want to, I, I- Yeah ...
continue to stay in questioning.
I just wanted to touch on the fact that you talked about the Caulerpa that had died
back.
Yeah.
And I know, I think last time before you were before the select committee, you were
trying to understand why that happened and whether that's gonna be a cyclic thing.
So I'm just interested to get an update on that.
I don't know if there's anything new on that, but at
this stage it's still sort of... I mean, have you, has there
been any latest thing from Niwa, has there?
No. Well, yeah, so there was all the dieback certainly last year.
Yeah.
Part of that was the storms up in Bay of Islands, but also more
non-storm related in the Hauraki and around Great Barrier.
Over the last summer, some of that has started to regrow.
Yeah.
But we also just proved in the last week or so, some
further work that's been done out around Great Barrier, we've again started to see
some of it starting to die back again.
Interesting. Mm.
Think that that's possibly associated with spawning.
Okay.
But it also indicates the life cycle that in
places possibly the Caulerpa may be settling
into
potentially more of a balance,
where it's not
as smothering as it has been. And it's achieving more of
a balance and certainly in some rocky areas that's what we think we're starting to
see.
Okay.
Early days though. Couple of seasons of seeing this
variability. Ongoing research that we're continuing
to support in this space to try and get that
better understanding.
Understand. Oh, thank you.
Yeah.
You had a very quick question. Yes, I do.
Look, hey, I'm really keen to understand the budget funding for
TB going forward. I mean, we obviously have a changing landscape now.
We're quite targeted in the areas that it's affecting.
I'm just keen to see how you plan to implement that funding.
So that's-
So it's not really done through, that's done via OSPRI.
So
what you see in the budget is the government's commitment to that.
And
I believe the numbers are, it's third government, third dairy,
third sheep and beef, and maybe a little bit deer.
And so that's managed through OSPRI.
And that money, that's unchanged from what it's historically
been.
As we
change the direction... Well, the fundamental
change that will happen with the plan is moving away from
a focus around herd to herd
transmission or
now into a phase of vector control, in that
our problem isn't so much herds moving around anymore.
Yes, that'll still be a part of the problem,
but our real problem now is those last remaining
pockets of TB in the wildlife that
are coming through onto farmland and continually
reinfecting farms.
And that's the focus, that we need to actively get in
there and hit those areas. And so key,
one of the challenges over the,
I think, last
four or five years perhaps has, perhaps even a
little bit longer, has been the ability
to access land and areas to do that
control work on time,
and with the regularity it needs to ensure that you're really getting on top of
those populations. So certainly put a
pressure on OSPRI and
wanting to ensure that
they do use all the tools they've got available to make sure that they do get in
there. And
we've obviously got powers under the Biosecurity Act.
Obviously you want people to understand that this is
for the betterment of themselves and their neighbors and the wider
biodiversity.
But if people aren't going to listen to reason, then we do have
mechanisms available to us.
But the
focus is trying to work with people to get that access and to make sure we've got
on a regular basis.
Thank you.
Thank you. Right, we've got a question from Joseph, and then we'll go to you,
Steve.
Minister, it was great to have you in Queensland recently with the Prime Minister
and Deputy Prime Minister for a $79 million-
Yeah
... uplift to the biodiversity protection, namely wilding pines.
Just a question in terms of
how the plan is to distribute that at this stage.
I appreciate this all work being done.
Perhaps I'm going to question the Southland-
Yeah, yeah
... and your whole, the South stuff on a
There will be money spent in Southland, don't worry.
Look, at an overall level, we've obviously announced here are
some priority areas that we're going to focus on.
But
it'll be getting on top of that deferred maintenance in the first
place, and then pushing into some of those bad seed
source areas, making some headway on that.
The team
haven't quite just got the plan in terms of
the spend, where precisely it's going to be.
That's being worked on right now for
the next year.
And so I'll have all those details shortly, and
we can obviously share with you so you can calm your constituents down.
All right, so just one last supplementary.
Yeah.
So people right across the South Island, including my area of Mid dome, et
cetera, just-
Yeah
... tell them to hold their horses.
There's, there's-
There will be
money for Mid dome, won't there?
Yeah. All right.
Yeah.
Good news to come. Thank you very much.
Okay, thank you. Steve, you've been very patient. Thank you very much.
Oh, thank you, Madam Chair.
On the wilding pines.
Yep.
Great that you've finally got some money there. Why did you take so long?
Because we're going to spend
the next two years trying to catch up to where we were three years ago.
No?
Well, there'll be an element of some of the deferred maintenance
catch up.
Look, I've been pushing for it, and all I can say is finally managed to
get it over the line. And yeah, I worked as
hard as I could to get that funding.
Yeah. Cool.
Fantastic.
We're glad to see it. Obviously that's something we can all agree on.
Will it specifically target the branch lethum?
Yes. There is an intent to get into...
Obviously,
the branch lethum on its own is potentially,
what they've costed out is 100 million over 10 years.
Yeah.
So we're not going to solve all the branch lethum on this.
But we are certainly going to
push back there because that is the source of the seed coming
into Molesworth. So trying to, rather than spend
all the time-
Managing it
... constantly managing Molesworth, actually try and stop
Molesworth getting infected in the first place.
I think the key thing is going to be making sure we work
really hard over the next couple of years in terms of getting that
national pest management plan in place.
Mm-hmm.
And I think with that, if we can show here is a level of
commitment across government agencies and through funding
sources, then it makes it a lot easier to get
the Regional Council commitment and some of the
beneficiaries as well from the work to also commit
to that work. And if they're seeing
that long-term commitment from government, they're more likely to invest, and
that gives a lot more surety around the program, and we're not worried about
how long items are in a budget for or not. Much like the TB plan.
That's been in place for 20 more years plus, and with a
consistent level of funding from government, which has then been
matched by industry because they know that government funding's there
and everyone's joined in doing it.
My second to last up is,
is any of that investment on the wilding pines going to go towards development of
new technology?
In term-
Well, I mentioned-
In terms of like drone tech. Oh look, that's happening already.
Understood, yeah.
I imagine you went and saw some drones at field days like I
did.
Mm.
I think there's some potentially really good
technology that's available in that place, in that
space.
Mm.
And
yeah, I think looking forward, you'll see probably
more and more drones-
Mm
... being utilized for this control work that, rather than
having a
Hughes 500 hovering over a pine tree with someone dangling
out the side door.
In the wind and all the drama. Yeah.
Yeah. One of the drone companies I was talking to,
their plans are to have sort of like a mission
control in Christchurch, and from there, being
able to control drones all around the country and flying out,
to all sorts of weed. Could be wilding pines.
Mm.
Could be scotch thistle on my place.
Whatever. So I think there is a lot
of innovative technology in that space that could not
only get on top of it, but also at a much cheaper rate.
And game-changing opportunities in that space, I think, across the board for pests.
Yeah.
A quick sup on the original one about Caulerpa.
I haven't
set eyes on the submarine that you're talking about or how it functions, but is it
a potential use for gold claims or is it just
a, does a different thing?
I jokingly
suggested it
when I was looking at it
two weeks back.
I don't...
Possibly.
Possibly. But I wouldn't...
Yeah. I don't know
how you'd quite do it.
Yeah, not enough depth of water, probably.
Well, no, no, that's not the-
Might do a lot of damage to the bottom of the river if you did speed it along.
Yeah. Look, there'll be... Yeah, you'd be...
Some of the challenge would be,
think of it like a big vacuum cleaner.
The problem I saw was what do you do with all the silt?
Yeah.
Where does that go?
And how do you effectively manage that?
Because basically, yes, you could have that thing going along and where you've
got, those gold claims go quite a bit down into some of the silt
in the bottom of some of those
hydro lakes.
And yeah, that would be the challenge of
removing, where do you put that? How do you manage it?
That would be quite costly, I would think.
But,
the guy that's come up with it's a pretty innovative guy.
Who knows? He might have a solution.
But there's probably other aquatic pests that it might be more
useful for first. Yeah.
Okay. Good to understand.
I wouldn't rule it out, though.
No, no.
I've got more on biosecurity at some point.
Okay, we've just got a question that's up from you.
Yeah, thank you. A sup on the wild-
And then we're going to go to a primary from Dana.
Thank you. A sup on the wilding pines.
Yeah.
You mentioned that, or Steve, asked you about
you're going to be playing catch up and you said this is something you've been
pushing for for the last couple of years.
What was the barrier to you getting it across the line until
now?
Went up a level, I guess.
Okay. Thank you.
Dana.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Minister, my question is, what, if any, budget has been
allocated to implementing a new plant import system?
So
perhaps I'll get Stu to talk about the detail around the plant import health
system.
There is... I don't know if there's additional money, but
there is
funding that has gone towards the development of the
AI tool I was mentioning before.
Mm.
And that was going to reduce speed
by
half.
Half. Yeah.
The cut that's-
Reduce speed. Increase speed.
Oh, sorry. Increase speed.
Okay.
Reduce the time taken by half to create import health standards.
There's also been a piece of work going on
within the team
around
other ideas and solutions in terms
of importing
plant germplasm to speed that process
up and to provide alternate pathways,
and
what was the other...
There was one other thing in that space, wasn't there?
Yeah. There's the AI we're, there is work on the plant standards and the
system. Plant standards, and so they can go faster, quicker, more
efficiently, whether they're using offshore facilities, et cetera.
Yeah.
And the other aspect of the system is the big
investment of the plant laboratory, which is a quarantine facility
as part of that for importation of material as well.
So typically, how long would it take for an application to go through the
system?
For the
import-
The import-
Yeah
... import health standard. It depends
on the complexity of the import health standard.
Yeah.
They can take a few years at least,
if it's a new import health standard, and there's a whole lot of...
Depends on the product or the plant or the
material and all the-
Diseases, pests, viruses-
Yeah
... that can affect it or where it's coming from.
So-
If it's brand new, yes, it can be a lot of work and-
Okay
... sort of we've got to use AI and other methods to get it fast sorted.
Mm-hmm.
It's an update on an amendment, that can be done quicker.
So you don't have an average time?
No. It would be hard to put an average because-
What's the optimum time?
Well,
as quickly as possible is obviously the optimum.
Yeah.
Because everyone wants them done quickly, and so do we.
Within
12 months would be very good for a new import health standard.
Okay. So, when will the pear quince rootstock standards be
completed since they've been in there since 2022?
I'd have to come back on the detail of it.
Yeah, I don't know. There's a number of standards all in our work program.
Yeah.
So, I don't know, Nick, to-
And that's why we're doing this work, is because it has just slowed down
too much,
and it's taking too long to get, and there's becoming a backlog
of more and more things
that we need to get on top of. So we need to be utilizing
technology and that work happening
around how can we use overseas
laboratories and speed up processes there.
Again, it's that fine
balancing act between
wanting to allow
new breeds and cultivars in, but at the same
time keep pests and diseases
out, which could impact the
current
plants, crops that we've got here at the moment.
So, there is that delicate balancing act.
Is it possible for the member to find out, get a specific-
Yeah. I can answer
... written answer in response to that question?
Yeah.
Yes, because we're saying that this takes too long, and
it's slow-
Yeah
... and we've got things that have been in there for a long time.
Yeah.
And there's been no change to some for a very long time, but there's no budget
allocated to specific work in this area.
No. Wait, no. Yeah. Maybe just to go back a step.
Some years back, we did get an adjustment to be able to
try and get more into this, and we actually have cleared up a lot.
Okay.
But, they do take a long time, and
quite possibly the one you're referencing will be down the priority order
in terms of the things that we think are the most important for...
So there's a big list of things that people want to bring, and we tend to focus on
the things we think will get the greatest returns.
Yeah.
Mm-hmm.
The other thing, what you're raising is not inaccurate in terms of the
amount of time. We did want to speed that up.
Yeah.
One of the big challenges, and you all know this, is
MPI moved faster to import
kiwi fruit pollen, which caused the PSA disease.
And since that time, and the impact of that was massive on the
growers.
Mm-hmm.
And it finished up with a $50 million settlement by the government in this whole
thing.
Mm-hmm.
So everybody that's got pressure on it wants their thing,
wants their thing done.
But nobody wants any of it to ever go wrong.
Mm-hmm.
Yeah.
And so-
This is the-
My point as well, yeah
...
and it actually
in some respects-
Yeah
... hasn't been about a shortage of resources.
And this is where we do think that AI can make a difference.
If you ever look at the... It can take
a year of research to try and find, because that's what went wrong with PSA,
someone missed a piece of research.
Mm-hmm.
Yeah.
To try and find every piece of research on every single pest that can
affect the product that wants to come out of a particular country.
Particularly countries we're much more concerned about.
And then to compile that and then assess that.
And then the other thing to know in this process is, even once we have reached a
conclusion, the whole process is challengeable.
And so-
Much like the conversation we had on blueberries before.
Yes.
Yeah.
So,
you're right to raise that because-
Yeah
... it takes up a lot of energy at our end to try and get it right.
Mm-hmm.
And to try and find that balance. So the team are trying to review the whole
process to try and make it faster, keep the safeguards in there, use
technologies where we can. And then at the other end of it, and that we do
say you can bring this stuff in, have actually somewhere to bring it to.
Mm-hmm.
Because the other problem was the old facility was...
The glasshouses in the old facility now are kind of defunct, effectively.
So we're busy replacing all of that.
So yeah, it is a tricky one.
Oh, I can understand the challenges in it, but I can also understand the
frustrations-
Yeah
... from people when-
... it takes so long.
Oh, yeah.
Yeah.
Mm-hmm.
That's not standing in to get it right. Yeah.
No, that's right.
Yeah.
And then it costs a lot as well.
Yeah. Thank you, Dana. Okay. We've got a question from Sam.
Thank you, Minister, Director General.
Given the planned expenditure of around half a billion dollars, which will house
the imported plant germplasm, how confident are you that the plant import
process review will enable it to be fully utilized?
Look-
That was fancy
... I think it's important to differentiate between
the building per se and the greenhouses. Okay?
Mm-hmm.
The greenhouses are a small component of the
overall building. That overall building is
critical to our biosecurity system here in this
country, much in the same way as
we've got that great facility out at Wallaceville for the animal health lab.
We need something equivalent in the plant health lab space as well, where
all the scientists are, and they're able to do the research,
investigations, and all the other stuff they need to do.
I visited the old facility early on.
It was like a polytechnic from the 1970s.
It was pretty much falling down. You had people that were
honestly trying to do science in a room half the size of
this, and if they needed to-
Contain it. I'm busy duct taping sheets
of
film across the-- splitting the room in half. So that's important.
In terms of the glasshouses themselves, I think a
key thing to recognize here, the old facility, it was, I think,
an 85% or 87% government
subsidy
that people were getting on putting stuff in there.
Yes, now we've made it down to a 50% government
subsidy. It's still 50% government
subsidy to put products in there.
And I've given the team a clear direction,
as you know, they need to be making sure they can
have people putting gear in there.
But I'd like to think that
at a 50% government subsidy, that's pretty bloody generous from
us.
I would agree. No, thank you, Minister, and one-
And I'm pretty sure I know who asked you that question.
One supplementary.
I'm having a meeting with him shortly. Yeah.
One supplementary. How confident are you you've got the balance right in the dollar
investment between the physical assets and those spent on improving
the processes?
Look, I think that was essential to make that build.
It will be a once in a generation type
investment.
And so you've got to have a good quality facility
for those people to work in and do that work.
Agriculture, well, horticulture is
becoming so much more important to our economy.
Kiwi fruit sector in your area,
multi-billions now. Apples had a billion.
It will be
only increasing, and so we can't
have them being sort of like the poor cousins when it comes
in terms of that science support. So they do need a decent facility
for managing that plant health. So I do think that's important.
And yeah, look, as I mentioned before, there's work programs
underway in terms of how do we speed up the import health
system, how do we enable
better recognition of offshore
providers for importing some of this plant germplasm and
other techniques. But again, the balance is we've got to
ensure that we don't let anything nasty into this country,
and we have had situations where
we have found things in quarantine, where we've had to destroy what has been in the
quarantine facility. So,
that's why it's there.
Thank you, Minister.
Yeah.
Any further questions, team? Finally.
Uh-
Oh, yes.
Yes.
Sorry. Yes.
Well, if the question's coming-
Go, and then Steve
... any further questions.
I wanted to talk about Madagascar ragwort.
Yeah.
And what funding, if any, is in the budget specifically aimed at
targeting of that or preparedness of
it for other areas,
incursions around the country? And have there been any other
areas of incursion around the country that you're aware of?
In terms of precisely a dedicated amount in the budget, no, there
isn't.
There's ongoing work that the
team are doing within baseline,
around trying to work with industry
partners and Northland Regional Council.
And again, as I said to this committee when I appeared before you on
this topic,
I do think it is important that the region
and industry take the lead in this, and as government, we're there to support.
I don't think that in the initial
instance we need to be throwing money at it.
It is really an education process around
ensuring that farmers know, hey, this is what this
plant is, this is what it looks like.
If you see it,
A, make sure you report it, and then B, get on top
of
it
as quickly as you possibly can,
because the more you leave it, the more your farm will get
coated in this plant.
In terms of other detections, I was told the other day
apparently there's been a plant found on the
Pukeroa Hills out in Wairarapa.
Yeah, that's right.
Yeah.
So I don't know how that-- it's not exactly
major farming.
No. So yeah, we're just working with Great Barrier Island Council on that.
However, the person who reported it, the inspector, said that they saw
it at least in 2022.
Yeah.
So I guess probably been there for some time.
And we're just working through how much of it's there-
Yeah
... what extent it's-
And so we believe that it's potentially been in Northland for
20, 30 years and has been commonly mistaken as gravel
groundsel.
And so potentially it could be in other parts of the country where it's
commonly been mistaken for that plant.
And that's why that education piece
is, I think, critical.
But again, like I said, really does need a joined-up approach, and
I've asked John and his team to just keep working with
regional council and DairyNZ, Beef and Lamb
about let's get together first and have a bit of a
strategy around the education in the first instance and
the knowledge.
And then from there, we can potentially look at, okay, where do we want to move to
from that point?
So just to sup on that, thank you, Minister, and I accept your
reasoning that it's not something that the government can just throw money at it.
There does have to be the industry itself-
Yeah
... working alongside, I guess, perhaps.
Although I'm aware that you have done some bit of education around that, which is
very important.
I'm just thinking about
should we have a...
I mean, hypothetic, I suppose. It's tricky for you to answer,
but as far as the funding coming out of baseline at this particular
point, so there's no specific funding to tackle or work on it, but
anything's coming out of baseline right now.
Should we see it just suddenly go crazy around the country,
and the government then might have to look at stepping in in the way of
support in some way,
will there be money available for that?
I guess it could be the same for any potential incursion, right?
So that-
Yeah
... might happen or spread or whatever.
Yeah.
Mm.
Look, I mean,
didn't make any plans for avian influenza-
No
... or yellow-legged hornet.
When they came along, I went and got the funding we needed-
Yeah
... to do the business. So,
if that was to be a potential scenario, obviously we'd look at it and
go, "Okay, how much more do we need to ramp up-
Yeah
... efforts in terms of coordination?"
So it's not something that currently sits in a pool somewhere in your budget.
It's something you've got to go and get the additional funding for should it
happen.
No.
We don't have
any pools of money sitting there-
Yeah
... for what if this was to show up-
... here's some money for it, or what if that was to show up, here's money for it.
The work we're doing at the
moment is the on-farm support team up there are giving
advice. I know I visited them at the
Northland Field Days. They've been doing some work up
there
on chemical mixtures that were able to
provide a bit of better control at a cheaper cost.
It's still expensive and challenging.
So it'll be more of that work, and then the likes of
John or whoever in his team are working, trying to work with
industry partners,
too, and the regional council up there around putting
together a plan.
Okay.
Steve.
Oh, me.
Thought you were going to go first.
No, I've answered.
Credit for the success thus far on the
yellow-legged hornets. See Mike's here.
He must be happy, Mike, with how things have gone.
Yeah.
I hope it keeps going well.
Just quickly, what does that look like
over coming months in terms of the program of work-
Yeah
... to ensure that hopefully eradication has been achieved?
Yeah. So there will be, obviously at this time,
the reduced monitoring,
over winter because we wouldn't be expecting to seen it.
I think the date is 1st of September.
We'll increase monitoring back to where it was.
Yeah.
And then obviously we will wait and
see.
And there'll be,
obviously making decisions around
if we're not seeing anything,
then at what point do we wind things down?
But I believe the plan I've got at the moment is
some monitoring this spring and potentially next spring
as well, all going to depend on if
we see anything.
Yeah. Okay, cool.
Yeah.
And sort of a broader question about
invasive wasp species in general, which are a
wider problem than-
Yeah
... certainly the yellow-legged hornets.
Is there any sort of
national plan or long-term strategy around deal
with invasive social wasp species?
Bit of a harder thing because they've been here for
quite a while.
Years of time, yes.
Yeah. And so that is challenging. You got them all over the country.
I think,
we
provide some level of, or help in
terms of...
No.
The council. It goes to council.
We leave it to regional councils. Sorry, I did-
First
... I remember reading something about this this morning.
Yeah, but it's mainly the regional council's job
to manage those challenges locally.
Yeah. And outside of their carrying the responsibility for that, do you see
there is a need for a broader strategy from a
biosecurity point of view,
or invasive species point of view?
No?
It's a
bit hard to try and control everything that's been let into this
country over 100 or 700 years.
Yeah.
Okay. Thank you.
I've got a final one.
Okay, Jo.
Yeah.
Fire away.
All right. Thank you.
Just
thinking about
savings that have to be found across government
sectors, and I'm just wanted to...
You talked about your, you mentioned before, the on-farm support program, and I
understand that there'll
be maybe some scaling back or savings could include the
scaling back of low-value programs or programs that don't align with the
government's objectives and non-essential back-office functions.
And I've asked this question of other ministers as well, but how are we going to
determine and what criteria will be used as to whether a program is
of low value? And so would programs like the
on-farm support be impacted with any cost savings?
Well, obviously, I can only talk to what's in my portfolio-
Yes
... which on-farm support isn't.
Okay.
Personally,
when I go through the list of everything in my portfolios and I kind of feel most
of them are pretty essential.
Yes.
So
Uh, wouldn't be-
Good answer
... obviously, efficiencies would always be looked for.
How can we do things smarter?
Just throwing money and bodies at a problem often isn't the best way to
achieve an outcome. Sometimes it's how do you do it smarter.
So that will always be my area of focus is,
could we do this-- Is there a better way of doing this?
But in terms of cutting entire projects,
no. Seems like everyone wants me to add more projects, so.
Of course they do.
Yeah.
All right. Thank you.
We've got another primary.
Okay, Steve. Thank you.
Another subject.
Water, Minister.
So-
In regard to biosecurity.
Uh, I don't know. Are we still on biosecurity?
We can open it.
We can move on?
We can... You can open it up, yep.
Yep.
Water, if that's okay.
In regards of,
so you, uh-
You've got to tie it to the minister's portfolio.
As I understand, you have de- a partial delegation as associate minister on water,
making the announcements around-
For the environment.
Yeah.
Public and community and culture. Yeah.
Department of Environment.
Yeah.
So, I've already had your colleagues question me on that, so.
B****r.
Wrong committee.
Yeah.
Worth a try.
You can replay what I said in the environment committee, if you like.
I can have a look at that.
Can I go home? That's nearly it.
Yeah. I think we might be done. Are we?
Oh, no. I've got a couple. Hang on. We'll get there.
Clock's ticking, Steve.
We've got the four minutes.
I know.
Just filling time for the sake of it.
If you will forgive us to go back to
a couple of animal welfare things.
Hmm.
We can indulge you a little bit, but you're on a short leash.
A short leash.
What? What have I done?
Tied it through all the tapes.
Excuse the pun.
Have you seen the polling around the 80% farmer
support for requiring imported animal products to meet New Zealand's
welfare standards?
Yes, I have.
And
I wonder, in terms of
the expectations that you're currently putting on the pig industry-
Yeah
... not the expectations that I would have would think.
Excuse me, member. I don't think this is budget related.
Well, it could be. Could be something-
Well, the minister has raised it himself, and it's not, I don't think it is budget
related.
Could be a question of what expenditure-
I was like, yeah
... the minister has had advice on or has considered
in regard to,
acknowledging that you're deriving a code of welfare around pig
industry in particular.
I guess I would just say that's why I was-
We've got a-
... so focused on the regulations we did last year.
Point of order.
If I don't mind answering.
If the minister's happy to answer, what's the problem?
It's a point of order. Thank you. So, no.
Look, we do have in here Speakers' ruling 143 (2) , which says
estimates, uh, examination is confined to current spending plans as
contained in the budget documents.
It is to focus attention on the need to grant, reduce, or refuse to grant
particular appropriation, not a discussion of general policy.
Sure, but can I speak to the point of order?
There has been some-
Maybe I should sit.
Yeah. There has been some pretty reasonable leeway, I think, on the part of
ministers, not just this one, but the previous minister, Shane Jones, in terms of
fisheries.
That's right. He opened up some conversation.
The conversation-
If the minister's happy to answer the question, then I'll indulge you.
But just be mindful for any future questions if you're just trying to fill in time.
No, I'm not trying to fill in time. I mean, there's useful things to ask.
Yes. Look, all I was going to say is that's why I was focused on those
regulations last year, to make sure that the sector actually was
able to continue to operate and wasn't going to be forced out of business.
In terms of the survey,
I'd love to see what the actual question was, and was there a
counterfactual proposed in terms of,
would you be happy with that if it meant that you might lose out on being able
to export your products to other countries?
Because that is the risk we face, if
we impose, like we were talking about earlier
with the import health standards for blueberries and the like.
We want other countries to operate on a sound
scientific basis and at the same level.
If we were to introduce effectively non-tariff barriers,
then we open ourselves up to the risk coming from those
countries. So, it's
easy to answer one of those questions and say, "Yeah, sure.
Why the hell not?" When you don't think there's a
implication on you.
24%.
When... Yeah. I'd love to know what the answer would be if those
people properly understood what the implications could be on them.
In terms of the evaluation of what the extent of that potential risk is,
given that we're not stopping importation of anything, we're just requiring things,
as we do in food safety, to meet our welfare standards.
So there'd still be importation of product from other jurisdictions that do meet
the welfare standards.
Yeah.
So, I guess the question is whether there's, to what extent has the
government actually evaluated
how serious that risk is or whether it's a vanishingly small
risk that seems to be the case.
Look, this is probably getting more into the Minister of Trade's area than mine.
All I'd say is, if you haven't noticed on the
news, the world's not really operating to rules based order anymore.
Exactly.
So.
And, you can do that when you've got a carrier strike group and all
sorts of strategic weaponry.
We don't have a lot of that. We've got a bloody good rugby team, but that's not
going to help us out.
We're behaving like we are operating basically, it would seem.
Okay.
Thank you very much. Thank you very much, Minister. Thanks, Ray.
Thank you for coming. Thank you, everybody.
See you soon.
I bet-
Oh, no. I'm... So, yes, you will. You will see some of us.
Oh, yes. Four of us.
You're off me. You're off the panel.
Four of us.
Scott